reading-list.md, before:

- [Attention Is All You Need (2017)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762): Introduces the Transformer architecture for machine translation
- [Language Models are Few-Shot Learners (2020)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165): GPT-3 showed scaling up decoder-only language models allows them to learn new tasks (175 billion parameters, 10x more than previous)
- [Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback (2022)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155): ChatGPT (aligning language models with user intent via reinforcement learning)
- [Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models (2022)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15556): Experimentally understanding optimal training corpus size (proving that the AI industry was building models that were too big and not trained on enough data)
- [Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models (2023)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903#:~:text=,parameter): Using long strings of "intermediate" output to allow large language models to perform complex reasoning
- [DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning (2025)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948): Training LLMs using "verifiable rewards" in reinforcement learning (rather than human feedback, which is expensive)

Commit message:

Revise entry for Training Compute-Optimal LLMs
Updated the description for 'Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models' to emphasize the importance of data over parameters.

reading-list.md, after:

- [Attention Is All You Need (2017)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762): Introduces the Transformer architecture for machine translation
- [Language Models are Few-Shot Learners (2020)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165): GPT-3 showed scaling up decoder-only language models allows them to learn new tasks (175 billion parameters, 10x more than previous)
- [Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback (2022)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155): ChatGPT (aligning language models with user intent via reinforcement learning)
- [Training Compute-Optimal Large Language Models (2022)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15556): Experimentally understanding that more data is better than more parameters in your model
- [Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models (2023)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903#:~:text=,parameter): Using long strings of "intermediate" output to allow large language models to perform complex reasoning
- [DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning (2025)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948): Training LLMs using "verifiable rewards" in reinforcement learning (rather than human feedback, which is expensive)
